The Little Thumb
There once lived a man and his wife who had dwelt long together but had no children. They were very sad because of this, and their house felt empty. The wife often said to her husband: 'Oh, if only we had a child to cheer our home.' She sighed one day, 'I would be content with any child, even if it were ever so small, no bigger than my thumb.' After some time had passed, the wife bore a son, just as she had wished. But when the child arrived, he was healthy and well-formed, yet he was indeed no bigger than a thumb. The man and his wife rejoiced greatly, but saw he remained small day after day. And he did not grow any larger as the years went by. Still, they loved him dearly and took great care of him. They called him simply, The Little Thumb.
When some years had passed, The Little Thumb remained small in body but grew clever and quick-witted. He could thread the finest needles for his mother when her eyes grew dim. He could creep into mouse-holes in the larder to see if any grain was lost. His father and mother saw how clever he was and took great joy in him. Though he was clever, he could not help his father with heavy work in the fields or the forest. One day, his father needed to take a cartload of wood to the village to sell. The man sighed and said: 'Alas, I must go alone, for The Little Thumb is too small to drive the horse.' 'Do not worry, Father,' said The Little Thumb, 'I can sit in the horse's ear and tell him which way to go.' The father laughed at this, but as he had no other help, he agreed to try. So The Little Thumb sat in the horse's ear, and the horse obeyed his commands, reaching the village perfectly.
As they arrived in the village marketplace, two strange men saw the cart arrive with the horse moving with no driver visible. They were amazed and went closer, and after looking carefully, they found The Little Thumb perched in the horse's ear. 'See this marvel!' said one to the other, 'This little fellow could make us rich if we showed him in the towns.' They went to the father, who was unloading the wood, and offered him a large piece of gold for the tiny boy. The man shook his head and said: 'My son is not for sale; he is worth more to me than all the gold in the world.' But The Little Thumb heard this and whispered from the horse's ear: 'Father, take the gold; I am clever enough to escape them and will soon come back to you.' So the father, trusting his son's cleverness and thinking of the gold, agreed with a heavy heart. He took the gold piece, and gave The Little Thumb to the strangers. The men were delighted and placed him carefully on the brim of one of their hats. Then they set off on their way, planning how much money they would make.
The Little Thumb sat quietly on the hat brim and waited patiently. When evening came and darkness began to fall, they stopped to rest near a ploughed field. The man took off his hat for a moment, and quick as a mouse, The Little Thumb leapt down. He ran between the large clods of earth in the field and quickly slipped into an empty mouse-hole. The men heard him jump and ran after him, but though they searched and searched among the clods, they could not find him. They called out, 'Little man, come out, we will treat you well!' but The Little Thumb heard them well and did not stir. As it grew quite dark, they could search no longer and had to give up. Cursing their bad luck, the two men went away angry without him. When all was quiet, The Little Thumb crept out of the mouse-hole. 'It is dangerous to stay here in the open field at night,' he thought to himself.
He looked about for shelter and luckily found an empty snail shell nearby. 'This will do,' he said, 'I will rest here tonight.' He crept inside, but just as he was about to fall asleep, he heard voices approaching. He carefully peeked out and saw two men creeping along, whispering to each other. They were thieves, planning to rob the rich pastor's house nearby. One thief said, 'The window bars are too narrow for us; if only we had someone small to slip through and open the door from inside!' The Little Thumb heard this and thought, 'Here is a chance!' He called out softly from his snail shell, 'Here I am! I can help you with that!' The thieves were startled, looked down, and were amazed to see the tiny boy. 'You are just the fellow we need!' cried one, delighted, and carefully picked up the snail shell with The Little Thumb inside.
They carried him towards the house, telling him to slip through the window bars and unlock the door from the inside. Soon they reached the pastor's house, where all was dark and quiet. The thieves lifted him up to the window, which had iron bars. But instead of being quiet, The Little Thumb shouted with all his might. 'What do you want in here?' he cried loudly, 'Do you want everything that is inside?' The thieves were startled and hissed, 'Be quiet, little rascal, or you will wake everyone!' But the cook in the kitchen next door heard the noise and sat up in bed to listen. The Little Thumb pretended not to understand them and shouted even louder, 'What is it you want? Shall I hand everything out?' The cook heard this plainly, got up, and came to the kitchen door with a lamp. When the thieves heard her coming, they took fright and ran off as fast as they could.
The cook looked around after the thieves had run off, but saw no one. As she held up her lamp, she heard a small voice but could not tell where it came from. The Little Thumb, who had perhaps slipped inside, called out again, 'Here I am, down here on the floor!' The cook finally spotted him and was greatly astonished at his small size. Thinking him a poor lost child, she took pity on him and picked him up gently. She warmed him by the hearth and gave him a little milk and bread in a thimble. The Little Thumb felt safe now and asked, 'Did you see those wicked men who ran away?' 'Aye, those scoundrels often lurk about,' the cook replied, 'They seek the Star-Child's Spark, it is said.' 'And what is that?' asked The Little Thumb, though a strange feeling stirred within him. 'A thing of great power, legend says, that resides in the smallest creature born under a certain star,' the cook explained, 'But it is likely just old tales; still, a small one like you should be careful.'
The Little Thumb thanked the cook but knew he could not stay; he must get home to his parents. Before dawn, while the cook still slept, he slipped out of the house. He found himself in the pastor's kitchen garden amongst the rows of vegetables. The morning dew was cold on the ground, so he crept amongst the cabbages to keep warm. Just then, the pastor's large cow was let out to graze in the garden. The cow began to eat the leaves nearby and, without noticing, swallowed The Little Thumb along with them. It was dark inside the cow's stomach, and The Little Thumb was tumbled about. More and more leaves came down, making the space quite crowded. 'This is a dreadful place!' he thought, 'How shall I ever get out?' He remembered how shouting had helped him before, so he began to shout as loudly as he could.
'Let me out! Let me out of here!' he cried. Now it happened that this was the time for milking, and the cow was led back to the barn. The milkmaid heard the shouting as she began to milk, and it seemed to come right from inside the cow! She was frightened and ran to the pastor, crying, 'Master, the cow spoke!' The pastor went himself to the barn but heard nothing at first and said, 'You must have imagined it.' But then The Little Thumb shouted again, 'Let me out!', and the pastor heard the voice clearly coming from the cow. He saw then that the cow must be bewitched and declared that it must be killed at once. So the cow was killed, and as it was being cut up, the stomach was taken out. The stomach, with The Little Thumb still inside, was about to be thrown onto the dung-heap. Luckily, The Little Thumb was still shouting, and someone heard him just in time, cut the stomach open carefully, and pulled him out.
The pastor was glad it was no demon and let the little fellow go his way. The Little Thumb thanked everyone and set off again towards his home. He travelled a long way, for the world is large when one is only as big as a thumb. At long last, he reached his father's house, and his parents were overjoyed to see him, for they had feared him lost forever. They wept for joy and hugged their little son. The Little Thumb gave his father the gold piece he had earned. He told them all his adventures, and they marvelled at his journey. 'Though you are small,' said his father, 'you are brave and clever, and worth more than any treasure.' 'We love you dearly,' said his mother, 'and we will never part with you again, for any price.' And so The Little Thumb stayed safely with his parents, and they lived together happily, for home is best.
