The Thirsty Fork
There was once a fork that was always thirsty. It dreamed with all its tines of gulping down hot soup. Now, this fork dwelt in a kitchen drawer, alongside a spoon and a knife. One day, the fork rattled its tines and said, "Alas, I am so very dry!" "Dry?" answered the spoon, "But we were washed only this morning with good hot water." "Nay," cried the fork, "not that kind of wet! I long for soup!" "Soup?" said the knife sharply, "What good is a fork for soup?" "I care not!" declared the fork, "I am thirsty, and I must try to drink soup!" Each day, the cook would use the fork to spear meat, or lift beans, or hold steady a pie. But all the while the fork thought only of soup, and it grew ever thirstier.
So it came to pass that the fork thought, "If I am to drink soup, I must get to the soup bowl when it is full." The next time the drawer was opened, the fork contrived to slip out and hide beneath a dishcloth on the counter. Alas, a ginger cat belonging to the cook saw the dishcloth wiggle, and it pounced and batted the fork onto the floor. The fork clattered loudly and landed near the nose of a sleepy dog under the table. The dog opened one eye, sniffed the fork with great interest, and then, finding it not to his taste, licked it with his great tongue. "Verily, this is not soup!" cried the fork, "This is not the wetness I desire at all!" Then the cook's youngest child, who was crawling by, spied the shiny thing upon the floor. The child picked it up, banged it merrily upon the leg of a stool, and then carried it out into the garden. There, the child dropped the fork among the cabbages and soon forgot all about it. "Alas," thought the fork, "Never shall I taste soup now, here amongst these dry leaves!"
For three days the fork lay in the garden; the sun shone hot, and then the rain fell cold, and the fork lay rusting slightly. Then an old gardener came to weed the cabbages and spied the fork among the plants. "Aha," said the gardener, "A useful little spike!" and he used it to mark a row for new seedlings. So the fork stood stuck upright in the damp earth, its tines pointed uselessly at the sky. Presently, a worm wriggled past and said, "Good moisture here in the earth, is it not?" "It is not soup!" cried the fork, whose tines indeed felt very dry, "Oh, my tines ache with thirst for hot soup!" That afternoon, the gardener's wife came to gather herbs and saw the fork. "Now what is this doing here?" she said, "This belongs in the house," and so she pulled it from the earth and took it inside. She wiped it on her apron and laid it upon the great kitchen table. "Oh, joy!" thought the fork, its tines quivering, "Now, now I shall have soup! My thirst will be quenched at last!"
Presently the cook returned to the kitchen and bustled about, and soon she clattered pots upon the stove and began to make a great quantity of soup. The fork lay on the table and watched with all its tines as the steam rose, fragrant and hot, from the simmering pot. At last, the soup was ladled into bowls, and a hungry man, the gardener's son, sat down and picked up the fork to eat his meal. The fork quivered with delight as it was plunged into the hot liquid; but alas, the soup ran right through its tines before it could taste a drop. The man, being very hungry, paid no heed and dipped and dipped the fork again into the bowl with great speed. And though the fork was always in the soup, it caught but a speck or two of a pea or a carrot on its tines. "Woe is me!" thought the fork, "I am ever in it, yet ever thirsty! My dream is a mockery!" The man had three full bowls of the hot soup, one after the other. By the time the last bowl was empty, the fork was quite bent and weary, and the constant steam had clouded its shine. Then it was tossed into a bucket with the spoon and knife to be washed, still as thirsty as before, if not more so.
Soon, the fork was scrubbed with hot, soapy water, which made it cleaner but, as it sadly noted, was still not soup. The very next day, it happened that the family decided to have a great pot of soup for their supper once more. And the fork, being clean and on the table once more, was picked up again by the same hungry man. Once more it was plunged into the steaming bowl, and once more the hot liquid streamed through its tines, mocking its thirst. This time, however, the man, his wife, and the child all ate soup, and they ate it for three whole days, using the fork amongst others. And between meals, the fork was often left standing in a small bowl of leftover soup on the table, to keep it moist, they said. The hot, salty liquid, never truly tasted, began to tarnish and weaken its tines. Slowly, slowly, its metallic nature gave way, and in a strange manner, it became one with the soup it could not drink. By the end of the third day, the fork was little more than a stained, bent shape at the bottom of the bowl, and its great thirst was stilled forever. No one ever noticed the sad remains, which were thrown out with the dishwater on the morrow.
