The Three Beans and the Grumbling Giantess
There was once an old man who had no food in his larder and no money in his purse. And he had but one single, scrawny chicken that laid no eggs. So one day he said to himself: 'I will take this chicken to market and see what I can get for it.' He took the chicken under his arm and set off for the market, and he travelled a long way. At last he came to a dark forest, and there he met a strange woman with a patched cloak and a hooked nose. 'Whither goest thou, old man,' said the woman, 'and what is that thou carriest so carefully?' 'Alas,' answered the old man, 'I am for the market to sell this chicken, for I have naught else to keep hunger from my door.' The woman looked at the scrawny chicken and then said: 'I will give thee three dry beans for that creature.' 'Three dry beans?' cried the old man, 'Why, the feathers alone are worth more than that, poor as it is!' 'These beans hold more value than all the gold at the king's court, if planted by a hopeful hand,' said the woman, and the old man, thinking of his empty purse, sighed and took the beans, giving her the chicken.
The old man returned to his poor hut, empty-handed save for the three beans, feeling weary and downcast. His wife, a woman with a sharp tongue and sharper eyes, met him at the door and asked: 'Well, old man, what riches did our fine chicken bring us today?' The old man held out his hand and showed her the three beans, saying: 'These three small, shriveled things are what I got.' 'Beans!' cried his wife, her voice like a rusty hinge, 'You traded our last chicken for three miserable beans?' and with that, she snatched them from his hand and threw them out the window into the dirt. That night there was no supper in the pot, and only harsh words to fill their bellies before they went to bed in misery. When the sun rose the next morning, the old man looked out of his small window with a heavy heart. But what he saw made him rub his eyes, for where his wife had thrown the beans, a great, thick stalk had grown overnight, reaching up into the very clouds. Without a word to his wife, who was still snoring in bed, the old man went outside and decided at once to climb the stalk and see where it led. He climbed and climbed, and it was a weary task for his old bones, but he kept going upwards all day. At last, when the sun was setting, he reached the top and found himself in a strange and silent land above the clouds.
He walked a little way and soon saw a wide, well-trodden path leading through wispy clouds. He followed it for a time and then spied a great castle in the distance, its towers so tall they seemed to prick the stars. As he drew nearer, he saw that the castle had a huge, oaken door, but there was no one about. His stomach rumbled with hunger, so he pushed the great door gently, and it swung open with a groan. He found himself in a vast hall, where a table was laden with food enough for fifty men, and by a great fireplace, a monstrous giant lay fast asleep, snoring like thunder. The old man, though trembling with fear, was so famished that he tiptoed to the table and quickly snatched a small crust of bread and a piece of cheese. But as he turned to flee, the giant stirred and opened one eye as big as a soup plate, and bellowed: 'Fee-fi-fo-fum, I smell the blood of an Englishman!' The giant sat up, making the very floor shake, and looking down at the terrified old man, he roared: 'What are you doing in my castle, little man, and stealing my food?' The old man fell to his knees and cried: 'Oh, noble giant, I meant no harm, but I am a poor, starving fellow from the world below, and I have not eaten for three days.' The giant scratched his great head for a moment, then said: 'Starving, are you? Well, that is a small matter, but what is not small is how terribly dull it is up here with no one to talk to but the echoes!'
I tell you what, little man,' the giant continued, a sudden thought brightening his face, 'if you can amuse me and be my servant, I will not eat you, and you shall have food aplenty.' The old man, seeing no other way to save his skin, quickly bowed and said: 'Most certainly, great sir! I shall be the best servant a giant ever had.' 'Good!' roared the giant, 'Then first, you shall take this duster and polish my little golden harp until it shines like the sun, for it has grown quite tarnished with no one to care for it.' The old man took the duster, which was the size of a small broom to him, and he rubbed and polished the golden harp with all his might. And as he worked, the harp began to glow, and soon it started to play the sweetest music of its own accord, a tune that made the old man forget his weariness. The giant, hearing the music, awoke from his musings and clapped his hands with glee, his face wreathed in smiles, and he declared the old man had done well and gave him a good meal. Just then, the giant's wife came into the hall, a woman even bigger than he, with a face like a thundercloud and a sour look upon her lips. 'Husband!' she boomed, 'What is this morsel I see? Fee-fi-fo-fum, do I smell a tasty little human for my pot?' 'Now, now, wife,' said the giant, holding up a hand, 'this is my new servant, and he is here to amuse us and do chores, not to be eaten.' The giantess sniffed disdainfully and said, 'Amuse us, you say? Very well, little man, if you can tell me a story I have never heard by tomorrow morning, you may live another day, but if not, into the pot you go!'
The old man's heart sank into his worn-out shoes, for how could a poor, simple fellow like himself find a story that a giant's wife, who lived above the clouds, had never heard? He crept away to a corner of the vast kitchen, sitting on the cold stone floor, and wracked his brains all through the night. Just as dawn was breaking, and he had found no story, the little golden harp beside him suddenly whispered: 'Do not fret, old man, I will tell you a secret.' 'The giantess snores like a pig in a thunderstorm,' twinkled the harp, 'and in her sleep, she mutters of her great love for pickled walnuts, a thing her husband does not know she hides under their bed.' 'Weave this into a tale of a queen who snored to shake mountains and secretly adored a peasant's simple dish of pickled walnuts,' the harp advised, 'and she will think it the newest story under the sun.' The old man felt a flicker of hope and thanked the little harp, and when the giantess lumbered in for breakfast, his old eyes twinkled. 'Well, little speck of dust?' boomed the giantess, waving a great, greasy spoon, 'Have you a story for me, or is my pot ready for a new ingredient?' The old man bowed low and began: 'Once upon a time, in a land far away, there lived a mighty Queen, renowned for her wisdom, but she had two little secrets...' He told of the Queen's mountainous snores that caused minor earthquakes, and her secret midnight feasts of pickled walnuts smuggled from the peasant market, and the giantess leaned closer and closer, her eyes widening until they were like dinner plates. 'Never!' she cried when he had finished, 'Never in all my days have I heard such a marvelously new and unheard-of tale! You shall live, little man, and for that, take this bag of gold!'
The old man clutched the bag of gold, which was heavier than he was, and his heart rejoiced, but then he thought of his poor wife and his little hut and wished to return below. So, he bowed to the giant who was picking his teeth with a young fir tree and said: 'If it pleases your immensity, might I have leave to visit my wife for a day or two?' 'Ho ho!' laughed the giant, 'Go along then, little man, but see that you return with more unheard-of tales for the wife, or perhaps a new game of skittles for me!' The old man thanked him profusely, hoisted the heavy bag of gold (which the giant courteously shrunk to a manageable size with a wink), and hastened away from the castle. He found the top of the beanstalk and slid and scrambled down much faster than he had climbed up, the bag of gold bumping beside him. When he reached the bottom, his wife was tending her small patch of cabbages, and when she saw him appear from the sky with a large sack, her mouth fell open like a surprised codfish. 'You threw away three beans, wife,' said the old man with a grin, 'but they bought us more than a lifetime of chickens!' and he upended the sack, and a river of gold coins poured out onto the dirt. For once, the wife was speechless, then she gave a great whoop, swooned with delight for a moment, and then began to dance a jig around the pile of gold, forgetting all her harsh words. And they bought a fine new cottage and lived in comfort, but the old man often looked up at the clouds and wondered what new story he could possibly find that a giantess had never heard. And as for the beanstalk, it remained a great wonder in their garden, though his wife often declared she wished its enormous leaves were good for cabbage soup, but alas, they were not.
