
There was once a poor weaver who had a daughter named Marta. She was not only fair to look upon, but had a wit as quick as her father’s shuttle. The king of that land was known to be stern but strangely fond of riddles and clever answers.

One day, the king, riding through the village, saw the weaver at his loom and stopped. ‘Good weaver,’ said the king, ‘they say your daughter is clever. Is this true?’

‘Sire,’ replied the weaver proudly, ‘she can untangle any knot, be it thread or trouble.’

‘We shall see,’ said the king. ‘Bring her to my castle tomorrow. If she can answer three questions I set her, I will reward you. If not, you shall pay a fine of ten gold pieces for your boasting.’

The weaver went home anxious, but Marta listened calmly. The next day, she dressed in her neatest, plainest clothes and went with her father to the castle.

The king sat on his throne. ‘Maiden,’ he said, ‘answer me this: What is the swiftest thing in the world?’

Marta curtsied and said, ‘Thought, Your Majesty. For thought can travel from one end of the world to the other in the blink of an eye.’

The king nodded, surprised. ‘Second question: What is the richest thing in the world?’

‘The earth, Your Majesty,’ answered Marta. ‘For out of the earth comes all the wealth that kings and commoners possess.’

The king stroked his beard. ‘And third: What is the sweetest thing in the world?’

‘Sleep, Your Majesty,’ said Marta. ‘For when sorrow or toil weighs heavy, sleep brings peace and restoration like nothing else.’

The king was impressed. ‘You have answered well,’ he said. ‘But true cleverness lies not just in words, but deeds. I will give you a task. Here is one pound of flax. Spin it into thread fine enough to weave a shirt for me, but you must do it between sunrise and sunset tomorrow. If you succeed, your father owes no fine, and you shall have this purse of silver. Fail, and the fine is doubled.’

Marta took the flax and went home. Her father despaired. ‘A pound of flax into a king’s shirt in one day! It is impossible!’

‘Do not worry, father,’ said Marta. She took a tiny splinter of wood from the flax bundle. The next morning, she returned to the castle and asked to see the king.

‘Your Majesty,’ she said, ‘I am ready to spin the flax and weave the shirt. But first, I need a loom. Will you have your carpenter make me one from this splinter of wood I hold? And it must be done between now and sunset, for that is the time I have for my task.’

The king stared at the tiny splinter, then at Marta, and burst into laughter. ‘Cleverly evaded, maiden!’ he said. ‘You have shown that an impossible task requires impossible tools. Your father owes no fine, and here is the purse of silver. Go now, your wit pleases me.’

Marta thanked the king and went home with the silver, and her father rejoiced that his daughter’s cleverness had saved him.

