
In a valley nestled between two stony mountains, there lived an Echo. For years it had done its duty faithfully, repeating the calls of shepherds, the shouts of lost travellers, and the occasional yodel of a wandering minstrel. But one day, the Echo grew bored. "Repeat, repeat, repeat," it mumbled to itself (which sounded like *repeat, repeat, repeat* fading softly). "Is that all there is?"

From that day on, the Echo decided to have opinions.

A shepherd called, "Lost my sheep!"
The Echo called back, "Serves you right!" (*right... right...*)

A maiden sang a sad song of lost love.
The Echo retorted, "He wasn't worth it!" (*worth it... worth it...*)

A merchant counting his money muttered, "Forty-one, forty-two..."
The Echo interrupted, "Try working for it!" (*for it... for it...*)

People began to avoid the Valley of the Argumentative Echo, for it was quite disconcerting.

Now, there also lived near this valley a Woodsman named Grum. He was known for his sour temper and his love of arguing. He heard tales of this rude Echo and scoffed. "An Echo arguing? Bah! Nonsense! I'll go give it a piece of my mind!"

He stomped into the valley, axe over his shoulder. "Echo!" he bellowed. "Are you there?"
"Of course I'm here, fool!" the Echo boomed back instantly. (*fool... fool...*)

Grum's face turned red. "Who are you calling a fool?"
"Who do YOU think, blockhead?" replied the Echo. (*blockhead... blockhead...*)

"I am Grum the Woodsman, the strongest man in these parts!" Grum shouted, puffing his chest.
"Strong maybe, smart no!" the Echo retorted. (*smart no... smart no...*)

"Why you insolent... air!" sputtered Grum. "I'll chop you down!"
"Try it! You'll only tire yourself out!" sneered the Echo. (*tire yourself out... out...*)

Grum swung his axe mightily against the cliff face. Chips of rock flew.
"Ha! Missed me!" laughed the Echo. (*missed me... missed me...*)

Grum chopped again, harder. Sweat beaded on his brow.
"Getting tired yet, old man?" mocked the Echo. (*old man... old man...*)

"I am NOT old!" roared Grum, chopping furiously.
"Getting older by the minute!" the Echo replied cheerfully. (*minute... minute...*)

They went on like this for nigh on an hour. Grum shouted insults; the Echo hurled them back, often adding a little twist. Grum chopped at rocks; the Echo laughed. The birds stopped singing to listen. A curious fox peered from behind a bush.

At last, Grum was exhausted. His arms ached. His throat was sore. He leaned on his axe, panting. "Alright, Echo," he gasped grudgingly. "You win this time. You're... you're a terrible conversationalist."
There was a pause. Then the Echo called back, slightly less sharp, "Takes one to know one!" (*know one... know one...*)

Grum actually chuckled, a rare sound. He wiped his brow. "Perhaps you're right," he admitted. He shouldered his axe. "Well, I'm going home for supper."
"Good idea! Don't trip!" the Echo advised, almost friendly. (*trip... trip...*)

Grum stomped out of the valley, tired but strangely less grumpy than usual. He had met his match, and it was nothing but air and rock. From then on, he sometimes went back to the valley, not to chop, but just to argue with the Echo for entertainment. And the Echo, finding someone who enjoyed a good argument as much as it did, became slightly less rude to other travellers, saving its sharpest retorts for Grum the Woodsman.




