
Sir Reginald the Resplendent was a knight. Or rather, he owned the armour of a knight. It was exceedingly shiny, with plumes and engravings, though truth be told, the metal was cheap tin polished to a high gleam. Sir Reginald loved his armour more than anything. He wore it constantly: to feasts, to market, even, some whispered, to bed. He polished it daily but refused ever to take it off, fearing it might get scratched, or worse, that someone might see him without it and realize he wasn't quite so resplendent underneath.

One soggy afternoon, Sir Reginald was riding through a drizzle (he refused to let mere weather keep his magnificence indoors). The drizzle turned to a downpour. Sir Reginald, snug in his tin suit, rode on until he reached a small inn for shelter. As he tried to dismount, he found his joints stiff. Alarmingly stiff. When he reached the inn door and tried to raise his visor to call the innkeeper, it wouldn't budge. He tried to bend his elbow – stuck fast! He tried to lift his knee – locked solid! The cheap tin armour, soaked by the rain, had rusted shut at every joint! Sir Reginald was trapped inside his own resplendence.

Panic seized him. He couldn't get off his horse! He couldn't raise his visor! He couldn't even bend to knock! He sat there on his horse like a tin statue in the pouring rain.

Presently, the innkeeper's daughter, a rosy-cheeked girl named Polly, peered out. "Lawks, Sir Knight!" she exclaimed. "Are you alright? You're getting soaked!"

Sir Reginald tried to sound nonchalant, his voice muffled behind the closed visor. "Ahem! Merely... merely enjoying the invigorating precipitation, my good girl!"

"But shouldn't you come inside?" Polly asked. "Your horse looks tired."

"Ah... no need, no need!" Sir Reginald squeaked, trying desperately to shift in his saddle and failing. "Just... admiring the architecture of your fine establishment!" (It was a very plain inn).

Polly looked puzzled but went back inside. Sir Reginald groaned. How could he get help without revealing his embarrassing plight?

Next, a blacksmith came trudging down the road, hammer over his shoulder. "Hullo, Sir Knight!" the blacksmith called. "Caught in the wet, are we? Need a hand with your horse?"

"Greetings, worthy smith!" boomed Sir Reginald, trying for heartiness. "My steed is perfectly content! Just... testing the durability of my superb armour against the elements!"

The blacksmith squinted at the armour, noticing a few tell-tale orange streaks appearing through the polish. "Looks like it could use a bit o' oil at the joints, Sir," he observed. "Happy to oblige, back at my forge?"

"No! I mean... unnecessary!" choked Sir Reginald. "Perfect working order! Smooth as silk!" He tried to wave dismissively, but his arm remained rigid.

The blacksmith shrugged and walked on, muttering about proud knights. Sir Reginald felt despair. He was stuck fast, and darkness was falling.

Then, a troop of travelling acrobats tumbled into the inn yard, seeking shelter. They saw the knight sitting motionless on his horse. "Look!" cried the leader, a nimble fellow in motley. "A statue! How wonderfully lifelike!"

One acrobat tried to climb onto the horse behind Sir Reginald. Another balanced a ball on his helmet. Sir Reginald, unable to move or protest effectively, could only make muffled spluttering noises from behind his visor. "Unhand me, varlets! Desist!"

"It talks!" shrieked a tumbler, tumbling right off the horse in surprise.

Just then, Polly came out again with a lantern. She saw the acrobats clambering over the knight. "Leave Sir Reginald alone!" she cried. "Can't you see he's... indisposed?" She looked closely at the rusted joints, the knight's rigid posture. Understanding dawned in her eyes. She suppressed a giggle.

"Acrobats," she said sweetly, "perhaps you could help the good knight *dismount*? He seems a bit... stiff."

The acrobats, always up for a challenge, swarmed around. Using their combined strength and gymnastic skill, they managed, with much grunting and heaving (from them) and muffled yelps (from Sir Reginald), to lift the entire knight, armour and all, off the horse and carry him like a log into the inn's stable. They propped him against a hay bale.

"There you go, Sir Statue!" chirped the leader, bowing.

Polly thanked them and shooed them inside. She returned to the stable with a can of oil and a rag. "Don't worry, Sir Reginald," she whispered conspiratorially through his visor's slit. "Your secret's safe with me. Let's see if we can loosen you up."

With Polly's patient oiling and gentle prying, first the visor creaked open, revealing the knight's very red and embarrassed face. Then, one by one, the elbow joints, the knee joints, the neck joint – they all groaned free. At last, Sir Reginald could move again. He stood up, stiffly, his armour streaked with rust and oil.

He looked at Polly, deeply humbled. "My... my thanks, lass," he mumbled, avoiding her gaze. "I have been... a fool."

"Aye, maybe a bit," Polly smiled kindly. "But even tin knights need help sometimes. Now, come inside for some warm soup."

Sir Reginald, stripped of his rusty armour (which the blacksmith later helped him remove entirely), sat by the inn fire in borrowed clothes, feeling remarkably comfortable. He learned that day that true resplendence wasn't about shiny armour you couldn't take off, but perhaps about accepting help when you were rusted shut.




