
Old Man Hemlock was the best basket weaver in the county, but he was also remarkably forgetful. He lived alone in a small, sturdy cottage he had built himself near the Whispering Reeds marsh. He often forgot where he put his tools, forgot to eat his dinner, and sometimes even forgot his own name for a moment or two. His saving grace was his routine: weave baskets, take them to market on Friday, buy food, come home.

One Thursday, preparing for market day, Hemlock realised he was completely out of supple willow withes. "Drat!" he muttered. "Must fetch more from the marsh." He grabbed his cutting knife and his favourite collecting basket – a particularly large, sturdy one he'd woven years ago – and headed out.

He spent the afternoon cutting withes by the marsh edge, losing track of time as usual. As dusk fell, he realised his large collecting basket was overflowing. "Too much to carry easily," he sighed. "And market is tomorrow... Hmm."

A peculiar thought struck his forgetful mind. "This basket is almost as big as my house," he mused aloud (though it wasn't really). "And my house is sturdy... perhaps..."

Instead of making two trips, Hemlock had a truly muddled idea. He emptied the withes out of the large basket. Then, using skills honed over decades, he quickly wove some of the fresh, supple withes *around* his small stone and timber cottage, securing them cleverly to the foundation stones and roof beams he himself had laid. He then somehow attached these woven bindings to the giant collecting basket which lay beside the house. His plan, fuzzy as it was, was to somehow use the basket to help drag or carry the *entire house* closer to the market road, saving himself a trip tomorrow.

It made no logical sense, but Hemlock was tired and forgetful. He tugged experimentally on the giant basket's handle. The woven withes creaked, the house shifted slightly with a groan. "Aha!" thought Hemlock, misinterpreting the groan as success. He gave another, mightier heave.

With a sound like tearing roots and snapping twine, the supple withes, combined with the magic inherent in the marsh reeds they grew near, did something unexpected. They didn't just pull the house; they *uprooted* it. The entire small cottage lifted slightly, hovering inches above the ground, tethered precariously to the giant basket like a stubborn mule to a flimsy rope.

Hemlock stared, bewildered. Before he could react, a gust of wind caught the hovering cottage. It began to drift, slowly at first, then faster, bumping erratically across the landscape, dragging the giant basket behind it.

"Stop! House, stop!" Hemlock cried, running after it, knife still in hand.

But the house paid no heed. It bumped over fields, snagged on trees (breaking branches), floated awkwardly across shallow streams, and headed determinedly away from the market town. Hemlock chased it, shouting, growing increasingly desperate as his home ran away from him.

He chased it all night. By dawn, the runaway house had bumped its way into a narrow, rocky gorge miles from home, where it finally wedged itself firmly between two sheer cliffs. It settled to the ground with a final, exhausted sigh of timbers.

Hemlock caught up, panting, knife still clutched in his hand. His house was intact, but hopelessly stuck. He couldn't weave it free. He couldn't pull it out. He sat down on a rock, utterly defeated. His forgetfulness and peculiar idea had cost him his home's location.

Just then, a troop of the King's soldiers marched into the gorge, escorting a wagon laden with stone for repairing a distant border fort. They stopped, amazed, at the sight of a cottage wedged between the cliffs. The Captain stared at Hemlock, sitting forlornly with a knife.

"You there!" the Captain barked. "Is this your dwelling? How in the King's name did it get here?"

Hemlock, forgetting his predicament for a moment, just looked confused. "Is it Thursday?" he asked.

The Captain, suspecting idiocy or witchcraft, ordered his men to investigate. They saw the woven withes, the giant basket nearby. "It seems," a sergeant reported, scratching his head, "that the old man somehow... dragged his house here with a basket?"

The Captain looked at the sturdy cottage, then at the narrow gorge blocking their path. An idea struck *him*. "Men!" he commanded. "This house blocks the King's vital supply route! We must dislodge it! Use the levers and ropes!"

The soldiers, grumbling but obedient, set to work. Using their strong ropes, heavy crowbars, and sheer numbers, they managed, after much effort, to pry the cottage free from the gorge. They pushed and pulled it clear of the path.

"There," said the Captain, satisfied. "Now, old man, see that you keep your house where it belongs!" The soldiers marched off with their wagon of stone.

Hemlock stared at his freed house, then back down the path towards home, then at the giant basket. He sighed. He carefully cut the withes connecting the house to the basket. He couldn't possibly drag it back. He abandoned the giant basket, gathered the cut withes he still needed, and trudged wearily back towards the spot where his house *should* be, hoping he remembered the way. He eventually found the empty patch of ground and resigned himself to living in the open until he could somehow earn enough for timbers to build anew, or perhaps find a way to move the house back bit by bit over many months. His forgetfulness had led him on a strange chase indeed.


