The Miser of Hollowdale
Once upon a time, there was a town. Its people lived simple lives. The town had sturdy houses and full larders, but the people were unhappy. In the town square, the children played like busy bees in a hive. The parents watched their children with pride. They thought, 'If only our children were grown.' The children were a picture of health. And so the days passed, one like the other. Then one day, a stranger came to the town. He was a Miser with a shiny cart full of sharp tools and strange potions. The townspeople were curious. 'I can make your children look like you,' said the Miser. Give me one gold coin for each child, and they will have the long noses and sharp jaws of adults. The parents eagerly agreed to his offer. And so the Miser set up his cart in the square.
On the first morning, the Miser laid out his instruments on a clean white cloth. He chose the mayor's son to be the first. 'Do you wish to be a man, little one?' asked the Miser. 'Yes, I do,' said the boy. The Miser picked up a small, sharp knife, and the boy's parents gave the Miser a gold coin. 'Do not let him touch the new nose until the moon is full, or it will not heal,' he warned. Then the Miser went to work, and soon the boy had a long, pointed nose just like his father. After a few hours, the boy looked in a mirror and saw a stranger. He walked out into the square, and the other children gasped. His face was old and sharp, but his voice was still high and his shoulders were still small. He strutted about. At his side, two bandages held the new nose in place. He remembered the Miser's words and did not touch the bandages, and the other children saw his resolve. Soon, every child in the town wanted a new face from the Miser. The Miser declared he would only stay for three days. The parents rushed to their homes, with gold coins clutched in hand, to bring their own children to the cart. The Miser cut and carved, and the Miser shaped and formed, and soon a line of children with new faces stood in the square. When the Miser saw all the gold coins in his bag, his eyes gleamed with delight.
Then the Miser announced a second change. He said, 'A long nose is not enough; a true adult has a sharp jaw.' The parents looked at their coins and saw they had few left. But then they looked at their children's long noses and thought how grand they looked. In the blink of an eye, the parents found more coins, and the children were given sharp jaws. But one little girl with round cheeks would not go. 'She will be left behind and stay a child forever,' sneered the Miser to her parents. Her parents grabbed her hand and dragged her to the cart. And on the third day, the Miser announced the final change, and he offered pointed ears for the price of their wedding rings. This was the greatest price of all. The mothers took off their rings, and the fathers took off their rings, and soon every child had a long nose, a sharp jaw, and pointed ears. The Miser was full of greed and joy, for he had taken all the town's gold.
Packing his cart, the Miser prepared to leave forever. He laughed at the parents and their strange-looking children. The parents saw then that their children's faces were not like theirs at all, but were twisted masks. But the changes could not be undone, and the Miser's cart was already rumbling away. He tipped his hat and rode out of the gates. The Miser was never seen in that town again. The children's faces began to ache and swell, for the Miser's work was crude and his potions were cheap. Then the parents were left with only their regret and their disfigured children. The children's new faces did not change back, but settled into scarred and painful shapes. There was great sorrow in the town. Their reward was a bitter lesson. And the parents took their children home. The children cried that they were not grown-ups, but only hurt children. The parents had to look upon the faces they had paid for, every single day. And they did not live happily ever after.
