The Miller's Youngest Son and the Golden Bird
Once upon a time, there was a king in a distant land. A poor miller lived with his three sons in a cottage hard by a great forest. The miller had nothing but a rusty mill, and the youngest son had only a single crust of bread each day. In the deep gloomy wood, their cottage was no bigger than a beehive. The youngest son gave his crust to the birds each morning. He often said to himself, 'If only I could find my fortune in the world.' Yet he was content with his lot for the time being. And so they lived in this way for many a year. But one day, the king's herald came to the village. A wondrous golden bird had stolen the king's favourite apple. The king was greatly angered by this theft. 'Whosoever brings me the golden bird shall have my daughter's hand,' said the king. If you bring the bird you shall be a prince, but if you fail you shall be thrown in the dungeon. The youngest son promised he would try. So he went on his way into the great forest. Presently, he came to a crossroads and sat upon a stone. There he met a little grey man with a long beard. 'Hark ye, young lad, whither go you in such a hurry?' asked the little man. 'I seek the king's golden bird,' answered the youth honestly. The youth shared his last crust of bread, and so the little man gave him a golden feather. 'Do not enter the wooden inn you see on your path,' said the little man, 'but enter the shabby one instead.' Then the youth thanked him and went on his way. At last, he came to a shining castle made entirely of glass. He took out the golden feather and touched the gate. The gate swung open into a silent courtyard, and all the fountains flowed with wine. He walked on. There stood two roaring lions in his path. He showed them the golden feather, and they became as quiet as lambs and let him pass. Now he entered a great hall where a wicked sorcerer sat on a throne. The sorcerer told him he must first sort a mountain of poppy seeds from a pile of sand by morning. The youth went into the courtyard and cried: 'All ye birds of the air, come and help me!' The birds he had fed came in a great flock, and they pecked, and they sorted, and by sunrise the task was finished. When the sorcerer saw that the work was done, he was filled with rage but could say nothing. Then he gave the youth a second, harder task. He must fetch a key from the bottom of a deep, dark well. The youth went to the well and looked in, but he knew not what to do and grew sad. But then he remembered the little grey man and held the feather over the water. In the twinkling of an eye, the key rose to the surface and into his hand. The youth went back to the sorcerer and showed him the key. 'You may have some magic on your side, but you will never defeat me!' cried the sorcerer. The youth said nothing, but held the feather before him. But the sorcerer was not satisfied and set a third task. He must bring the golden bird itself from the highest room of the tallest tower. The birds made a ladder for him with their wings, and the feather unlocked the door. Then the sorcerer's anger knew no bounds. Then the sorcerer flew at him in the shape of a great black raven. He struck the youth with a wicked spell that turned his legs to stone. The youth fell to the floor and could not move. But he reached out his hand and touched the raven with the tip of the golden feather. The youth thrust the feather into the raven's heart. And so the wicked sorcerer was burnt to ashes on the spot. In that moment, the glass castle turned into a beautiful garden, and all the people turned to stone were free again. Then he took the golden bird, which now sang sweetly in its cage. The golden bird became a beautiful princess who had been enchanted. All the freed people greatly rejoiced and cheered for the youth. The king gave him the princess and the entire kingdom. So the youth, who was now a king, returned to his father's cottage. His wicked elder brothers, who had tried to trick the king, were exposed by the princess. The brothers were made to dance in red-hot iron shoes until they were dead. And he and the princess lived happily to the end of their days.
