The Princess and the Three Curses
There was once a king whose piety was so great that no man in his kingdom was permitted to carry anything of iron or steel, nor even of gold or silver, for these he deemed too worldly. This king had an only daughter, whose sole virtues were her unblemished chastity and her constant prayers to God for guidance in all things. So it was that the princess combed her long hair with a comb carved of bone, and pinned it with pins of polished wood, for nothing sharper was allowed at court. Each morning she prayed for an hour, each noon for an hour, and each evening again for an hour, asking for protection from all worldly evils. One day, a messenger arrived from a great king who ruled a heathen land nearby, a land rich in iron and all manner of worldly goods. This heathen king demanded the princess's hand in marriage for his eldest son, threatening war and devastation if his request was refused. The pious king wept wooden tears, for his kingdom had no swords of iron nor shields of steel, and he prayed for three days and three nights for a sign. But no sign came, and at last the princess said to her father, 'Let me go to this heathen prince, dear father, and my prayers shall be my shield and my chastity my fortress.' So the princess was sent forth, dressed in simple linen, riding upon an unsaddled donkey, with only a small wooden flask of water and three oaten cakes for her journey. Her father the king gave her a large, blessed turnip, saying, 'May this holy root sustain you, and its blessed hardness be your only weapon, for no other may you carry.'
The princess rode upon her donkey for seven days and seven nights, until she came to the edge of a dark and gloomy forest. By this time, her three oaten cakes were eaten, and her wooden flask was dry. She knelt upon the mossy ground at the forest's edge and prayed to God for sustenance and protection. As she finished her prayer, a hideously ugly old man stepped out from behind a twisted tree; his clothes were of patched leather, and his eyes were small and red like those of a pig. He sniffed the air and spoke in a voice like stones grinding together, 'What make you here, wench, caterwauling in my wood?' The princess, though frightened by his appearance, replied, 'Good sir, I am a king's daughter on a journey to be wed, and I trust in God to see me safely to my destination.' The old man cackled, a sound like dry sticks breaking. 'God keeps no larder in this forest, girl. But I have a fine roasted pheasant at my hut, and I know a safe path. It is yours, if you will give me that which you guard so closely.' The princess drew herself up and said, 'Sir, my chastity is not for trade, and rather would I starve than gain sustenance at such a price; God will provide.' The old man's pig-like eyes narrowed, and he spat on the ground, 'Proud fool! Then may your donkey speak only in riddles about cabbages, and may it eat only turnips until you beg for my help!' And with a puff of green smoke that smelled of old socks, he was gone, and the donkey at her side brayed loudly a rhyme about a kingly sprout with a leafy crown.
The princess, sighing at her new predicament, urged the donkey forward onto a narrow, winding path into the gloomy forest, clutching her blessed turnip and praying for a swift end to its riddling. The donkey, however, would not drink from any clear stream they passed, but instead recited a long poem about the virtues of boiled cabbage, and then bit hopefully at the princess's turnip. Sighing again, the princess sparingly allowed the beast to nibble at the turnip, for she had naught else to offer it that it would accept. After three more days of such frustrating travel, with the donkey consuming nearly half of her blessed turnip, they came to a clearing where stood a miserable hut, crooked and leaning, with a roof of rotted thatch, from which smoke of an unpleasant, greasy odor curled. An old woman with a face like a shriveled apple, possessing but one gleaming yellow tooth in the front of her mouth, sat on a stool before it, spinning black wool with long, dirty fingernails. She looked up as the princess approached, and her single tooth stretched her lips into a disturbing smile as she said in a voice as sweet as poisoned honey, 'Well met, my dear. You look weary from your travels.' The princess, remembering her manners despite the woman's frightening aspect, replied, 'Good mother, I am indeed weary, and would be grateful for a place to rest my head, if God wills it so.' The old woman cackled again, showing her single tooth. 'Rest you shall have, and a bowl of my finest stew, child. All I ask in return is a single hair from your pretty head for each year of your maidenhood, to sweeten my pot.' The princess felt a chill despite the smoky fire and replied, 'My hair is a gift from God, good mother, and sanctified by my prayers; I cannot give it for stew.' The old woman's sweet smile vanished like mist. 'Twice refused! Then may your tongue speak only truths that sound like lies, and lies that sound like truth, until a king’s fool declares you honest!'
And with a final cackle that echoed strangely, the old woman shriveled into a pile of the black wool she had been spinning and was gone; and when the princess tried to pray for strength, the words came out as a boast about her donkey's appetite for root vegetables. The princess, now mostly silent for fear of what her tongue might utter, pressed on, though her donkey was growing thin and weak from its diet of only turnip and its constant poetic recitations about cabbage which left it little breath for walking. At last, after two more days, the poor donkey gave a final, mournful bray that sounded suspiciously like a lament for a particularly fine head of savoy, and fell quite dead upon the path. The princess wept, said a prayer for its long-eared soul, and took from its mouth the last piece of the blessed turnip, which was now no bigger than her thumb. She walked on alone for another day, her feet sore and her stomach empty, until she saw before her a great castle with tall white towers, from which flew banners of silk. As she drew near, a man in a coat of velvet stood upon the drawbridge, ringing a silver bell and crying out, 'A place at the king's table and a new pair of shoes for any maiden who can weep a full crystal vial of tears for our ailing queen!' The princess, who had wept much already, thought this might be a service she could offer, but she feared to speak lest her words be twisted by the old woman's curse. She therefore only nodded earnestly and pointed to her eyes, but when the man in velvet asked if she could weep, she opened her mouth to say 'Indeed, my heart is full of sorrow,' but instead heard herself declare loudly, 'Indeed, I can fill a hundred such vials with sneezes alone, and care not a fig for any queen!' The man in velvet reeled back in horror, his face purpled with rage. 'Impudent baggage! Mocking our queen's sorrow! Be off with you!' And he struck her with his bell and drove her away from the castle gate with blows from a silken cloth used for polishing boots. The princess, weeping anew though no sound came but a strange hiccuping, stumbled back towards the forest path, her hope of aid quite vanished.
As night fell, cold and damp, she sank to the ground beside a gnarled oak and, remembering her father's words, took out the thumb-sized piece of turnip and ate it in three small, bitter bites. No sooner had she swallowed the last crumb than her stomach gurgled, her throat tickled, and she coughed up a tiny, furious man no taller than her thumb, dressed in a scarlet coat and a green pointed cap, with a face like a pickled walnut. This little mannikin danced with rage upon her knee and shrieked in a voice like a mosquito, 'You greedy wench! You've eaten my house, my turnip-cottage! For this, you shall serve me for seven years!' The princess tried to stammer an apology, meaning to say she was very sorry, but what came out was, 'Truly, sir, I find turnip-dwellings drafty and prefer mushrooms for their earthy aroma!' The mannikin's face turned puce. 'Insolence! For that, you shall be my scullery maid!' He clapped his hands thrice, and the princess felt a strange pulling sensation as she dwindled and shrank, until she was no taller than he. He then prodded her with a sharp twig towards a hole in the gnarled oak tree, which seemed to be his front door, and pushed her inside. Inside, the hole was furnished with a toadstool table and a bed of dried moss, and the mannikin handed her a single boar bristle, commanding her to scrub the mud from his collection of acorn cups. The princess, now thumb-sized, began her work, her tiny tears falling onto the acorn cups as she prayed for deliverance, though her prayer came out sounding like a demand for more acorn-cup polish. Meanwhile, the mannikin sat upon his toadstool, sharpened his green cap to a finer point on a stone, and devoured three roasted ladybugs and a dewdrop cordial, occasionally shouting, 'Work faster, you overgrown turnip-thief!' And so the princess toiled for what seemed an age, sleeping on a cobweb and eating half a mildewed crumb each day, her donkey's cabbage-riddles echoing in her memory, and her own tongue ever betraying her good intentions to the spiteful mannikin.
One morning, after seven weeks of this misery, the mannikin, who had grown rather plump on spider-egg omelettes, announced, 'Today, scullery maid, we go on a great journey to visit my cousin, the King of the Ants!' He then packed the princess into a discarded matchbox lined with fluff he’d pulled from a bumblebee, giving her one dried pea for sustenance. He himself mounted a large black ant as his steed, holding the matchbox carefully in one hand, and set off at a surprising pace through the undergrowth. The princess, inside the matchbox, was jolted and bumped, and the world outside the tiny airholes smelled of damp earth and squashed beetles. After many hours, they arrived at what the mannikin announced was the great city of his cousin, a vast network of tunnels and chambers under the roots of a giant mushroom, bustling with thousands of ants. Worker ants with large jaws bowed their antennae as the mannikin and his ant-steed passed, and a path was cleared for them through the throng. They were led to a vast central chamber where the King of the Ants, a creature easily twice the size of the others, sat upon a throne of carefully glued pebbles, wearing a tiny crown fashioned from a beetle-shell and looking very imperious. The mannikin hopped off his ant, bowed low, and chirped, 'Your Royal Antship, my most esteemed cousin, I have brought you a gift, or perhaps a curiosity – a human princess, much reduced, and most peculiarly cursed.' The Ant King stroked his antennae thoughtfully. 'Reduced and cursed, you say? Tell me more of these curses, little cousin. We have had trouble with the Termite Queen of late, and a well-placed, perplexing utterance might be just the thing.' The mannikin eagerly described her truth-twisting tongue, and as the princess listened from her matchbox, understanding the Ant King's terrible and cunning interest, a new dread filled her that was colder than any she had known before.
The Ant King rubbed his forelegs together. 'Excellent! We shall send this... mouthpiece... to our rival, the Termite Queen, with a message of feigned alliance. Her confusion will be our opportunity!' The princess was tipped out of the matchbox, and when the Ant King instructed her on the false message of peace she was to deliver, she tried to pray for wisdom, but instead exclaimed, 'Oh, I do hope the Termites have excellent architects for their mounds!' The Ant King nodded with grim satisfaction, and so the tiny princess was dispatched, riding again in her matchbox upon the mannikin's ant, towards the great, dark mound of the Termite Queen. Before the glowering Termite Queen, the princess opened her mouth to deliver the false tidings of peace and goodwill, but instead declared, 'Your Majesty, your antennae are askew, and your soldiers march like drunken beetles!' The Termite Queen, naturally, flew into a magnificent rage, and when the princess tried to apologize, she instead shrieked, 'And furthermore, we shall nibble your foundations to dust for the sheer joy of it!' In the ensuing uproar as termite soldiers swarmed, the mannikin grabbed the matchbox and his ant-steed retreated with great speed, the mannikin himself chuckling with delight. The Ant King was overjoyed at the news of imminent war with the Termites and rewarded the mannikin with a jar of aphid honey, declaring, 'Your gift was potent, cousin! Now, for my peace of mind, take her to the Spider Sage in the webbiest part of the wood and have that tongue-twist of hers undone. She is too unpredictable for polite ant society.' The mannikin, eager for his honey, agreed readily and journeyed with the princess in the matchbox to the webbiest part of the wood, where an ancient, enormous Spider Sage was said to dwell. The Spider Sage, after much pondering and examining the princess with eight shimmering eyes, agreed to lift the curse from her tongue by spinning a tiny thread of moonlight and truth, which he then deftly plucked from her tongue; but only if she vowed to keep seven years of complete silence thereafter. The princess readily agreed, and once her tongue felt blessedly normal, the mannikin, with a tiny, almost regretful nod, clapped his hands thrice more, and she grew back to her own size as he himself shimmered and vanished, leaving only the scent of turnips and damp earth behind.
