The Thirsty Tin Fork
Once upon a time, there was a little tin fork, and it was ever thirsty and dreamed always of soup. It dwelt in a kitchen drawer, amongst many dull knives and stout spoons. The spoons gaped wide, but the fork thought them foolish, for they never spoke of thirst. One morning, the drawer was pulled open with a great rattle. A stout cook thrust her hand in and poked about amongst the cutlery. The little fork thought, 'Now I shall drink deep!', but the cook seized it to spear a roasted chicken. Alas, it was dry work, and the fork grew thirstier still. Then the cook tossed it aside, and it landed with a clatter on the table, near a great pot. Steam arose from the pot, and its little tin heart pricked up, if a fork can be said to have such a thing. It wriggled its tines with all its might, but, being a fork, it could not move an inch from where it lay.
Presently, a kitchen boy, whistling a merry tune, came by the table where the fork lay. His eye fell upon the fork, and he picked it up idly. The boy, thinking naught of soup or thirst, carried it towards the great steaming pot. 'Aha!' thought the little fork, 'Now my time has come to drink to my heart's content!' But the boy only used its tines to scratch his own greasy hair for a moment. This was not soup at all, and it made the fork feel quite dull and even more parched. Then, done with his scratching, the boy tossed the fork without a thought into a bucket of dirty water beside the scullery door. 'Well,' thought the fork, sinking slowly, 'This is wet, it is true, but it is not the soup of my dreams, and it quenches no thirst of mine.' Soon, an old scullery maid with a wart on her chin came to empty the bucket and spied the fork amongst the grime. "Tsk, tsk, good tin wasted," she muttered, and she fished it out, scrubbed it fiercely with sand, and dried it on her apron.
The fork, now clean and rather scratched, was then placed by her in a blue jug on the kitchen windowsill. From the windowsill, it could see into the great hall where the master of the house ate, and it watched the silver spoons dipping into steaming bowls. "Oh, cruel fate!" it sighed, (though a fork's sigh is a very quiet thing indeed), "Why was I made with tines so stark, and not a bowl to hold the lovely broth?" Just then, a sleek black cat with yellow eyes jumped onto the windowsill and batted idly at the fork's handle. The fork, startled, tumbled out of the blue jug, over the sill, and fell straight into the master's own soup tureen below, which was, as it happened, full to the brim. There was a great splash, and the fork found itself entirely submerged. 'Alas!' it thought, 'I am in it, but I cannot drink it!' The master of the house, who was about to ladle himself a portion, frowned mightily and fished it out with a grimace using his napkin. "Hark ye, servant!" he called to a passing footman, "Take this errant piece of tin away, and see it is put to better use than seasoning my broth!" The footman bowed, took the fork, and the fork thought, 'Perhaps now for the scullery soup pot, which is better than naught!', but the footman carried it towards a grand table laden with many fine dishes. There, he laid it carefully beside a glistening plate, amongst gleaming silver knives and other forks with proud, polished handles.
Soon, a portly nobleman, a guest of great import, was seated before the plate, and this nobleman loved nothing more than a hearty soup to begin his meal. A large tureen of the very same broth the fork had briefly met was placed before him, yet the nobleman picked up not a spoon, but our little tin fork. 'What is this?' thought the fork, as it was lifted. 'Can it be? My true calling at last!' The portly nobleman then began to spear and prod at the vegetables in his soup with the fork, a most unsatisfactory way to eat soup, all sensible folk would agree. The fork was plunged again and again into the hot broth; though little liquid clung to its tines, it was undeniably soup. "Joy, oh joy!" sang the little fork in its tinny heart, "I am drinking, after a fashion! My thirst is being met!" Now, the nobleman was a slow and determined eater, and the soup course lasted a great while. Other guests at the table exchanged puzzled glances at his choice of utensil, but none dared to correct a nobleman of such import. Hour after hour, the little tin fork was dipped and swirled, and a strange orange fuzz began to appear upon its tines. It was still very thirsty, for it could not truly drink, but it was too full of soupy joy to notice its own slow decay.
For three whole days and three whole nights, the nobleman ate nothing but soup, and he used only the little tin fork. The little fork grew heavy and pitted with rust, and its tines drooped sadly, and it no longer gleamed at all. 'Ah,' it thought faintly, for it was growing weak, 'This is the life for a thirsty soul! A fine thing indeed to be so useful for soup!' At last, on the eve of the fourth day, the nobleman wiped his lips with a napkin and declared himself satisfied with the soup. The footman, clearing the table, saw the sad, rusty state of the fork and tossed the ruined thing without ceremony into the washing-up bowl. It sank amongst the soapy bubbles and the grease, and its thirst was, in a way, surrounded by wetness at last. "So much... soup..." it thought, as the world grew dim. "Must... drink... but I am... too heavy to... try..." And as no one noticed it there at the bottom of the greasy bowl, slowly, slowly, the tin gave way to the water and the rust. Until at last, it became naught but a reddish stain in the bottom of the bowl, still thirsty, some might say, to its very end. And that was the end of the fork that dreamed too much of soup, and not enough of being a good and sturdy fork.
