The Proud Long Sausage
There was once a fine, long sausage who lay upon a butcher's stall. He was, indeed, the longest sausage in the entire town, and of this he was exceedingly proud. Many folk came to the stall, and when they saw him, they would look and say, "My, what a sausage!" But for all their looking, none ever bought him. At this, the sausage would swell a little more, thinking, "Meseemed I am too grand for common eating." Beside him lay many little, common sausages, all jumbled together. "Poor, short things!" he would think with a sigh that was almost a sneer. The butcher, too, would often take a soft cloth and polish him till he shone, and always placed him apart from the rest. "See?" the long sausage would tell himself, "Even the master butcher knows my true worth is not to be sold cheaply or to just any soul." So he lay and shone upon the stall, day after day, a king amongst sausages, or so he believed.
One morning, as the sun first touched the edge of the butcher's awning, the long sausage stretched himself as far as he could, which was very far indeed. He watched as several of his shorter brethren were scooped up by a cook-maid, wrapped in paper, and carried off. "Hmph," he thought. "To be merely eaten. Such a dull end for a sausage, however short." Then, a stout woman in a fine silk dress and a feathered hat approached the stall with an air of great importance. She surveyed the meats for a moment, then pointed a gloved finger directly at the long sausage and declared, "That one!" The long sausage quivered with delight from one end to the other. "At last!" he thought. "One who understands true magnificence!" "A fine choice, madam," said the butcher, reaching for him with a pair of tongs. "Yes," said the woman, "He will do nicely for my little dog's breakfast, chopped up small, of course." The long sausage, who had heard this, seemed to shrink a little upon the stall, and a tiny, almost inaudible squeak escaped him. But the woman paid her coins, and the butcher wrapped him in clean paper, and she carried him off in her basket.
In the basket, the long sausage was jostled about amongst cabbages and a loaf of bread, a far cry from his kingly repose on the polished stall. He tried to hold himself straight and sniffed at a nearby turnip, thinking, "To be bundled with such common fare!" Soon they arrived at a grand house with many windows, and the woman carried the basket into a large, warm kitchen. There, she unwrapped him and laid him upon a wide wooden board, right next to a large, gleaming knife. The long sausage looked at the knife, and then he remembered the words 'chopped up small,' and if a sausage could turn pale, he would have done so. Just then, a yapping, fluffy little creature, no longer than his shortest cousin at the butcher's stall, trotted into the kitchen. "Ah, my little poppet!" cooed the woman. "See what a long, special treat I have for your breakfast!" The long sausage gave a great shudder and tried to roll away, but he was too long and unwieldy on the flat board. The woman paid him no mind, merely chuckled at the little dog's eager barks, and picked up the gleaming knife. She hummed a little tune and placed its sharp edge upon his very middle, where his pride had always been the greatest.
Down came the knife with a swift chop, and the long sausage felt a most surprising and unpleasant sensation. He looked, or would have if he had eyes, and saw that he was no longer one, but two, and his famous length was quite undone. Then it was chop, chop, chop, and with every fall of the knife, he became shorter and more numerous. "Oh, my length, my beautiful length!" he might have cried. "Where was my grandeur now, in these many small pieces?" The fluffy little dog sat watching all this, its tail wagging with great enthusiasm and its pink tongue licking its chops. Soon the chopping was done, and the woman scooped up all the little rounds of what was once the long, proud sausage. She tipped them into a small blue bowl that sat upon the floor. The fluffy little dog yelped with joy and began to gobble them up with great relish, piece by piece. And as each piece vanished, there was no thought of length or pride, one might imagine, only the crunch and the chew. Soon he was all gone, every last little bit, from the tip of his once grand tail to the end of his noble nose.
The little dog licked its lips with satisfaction, gave a happy sigh, and wagged its tail once more. The stout woman in the silk dress merely smiled, washed the blue bowl, and wiped the wooden board clean of any trace. Back at the butcher's stall, the sun shone as before, and another sausage, nearly as long as our friend had been, lay glistening in his place. The butcher came and polished it with his cloth, just as he had done for the one before. And folk who passed by stopped and stared and said, "My, what a fine, long sausage that is!" And this new sausage, hearing their words, began to swell a little with an unfamiliar feeling of importance. For it is often so, that great pride in one's own skin, especially if that skin be sausage-skin, leads to a rather common end. A long appearance is no shield against a short end, if the chopper be willing and the little dog hungry. And whether one is long or short before the knife, what good is length then, save to make more pieces? And so it was with the proud, long sausage, and so it may be with others who forget what they are made for.
