The Imp's Riddle and the Giant's Feather
There was once a young man who dwelt in a small cottage, and his father was not there. His father had vanished one morning many years before, and no trace of him was ever found. The young man was poor and toiled as a woodcutter's apprentice in the great forest nearby. One day, whilst he was splitting logs, a mischievous imp appeared before him on a tree stump. The imp was tiny and green, with pointed ears, and it began jigging and poking the young man with a sharp stick. The young man swatted at the imp as if it were a fly. But the imp darted away, cackling, and then threw pebbles at the young man's head. "Prithee, little creature, what do you want of me?" cried the young man. The imp stopped its mischief and said, "If you seek what was lost, then you must first find what was never looked for." Then the imp vanished in a puff of green smoke, and the young man was left alone with the strange words.
The young man found he could not swing his axe again that day, for the imp's words filled his head. He returned to his cottage earlier than usual and resolved to seek out the meaning of the imp's riddle. His old mother, who was stirring a pot of thin soup, saw his troubled brow and asked why he was home so soon. The young man told her all that had passed with the imp and the riddle it had given him. His mother grew pale and said, "Alas, my son, meddle not with such creatures, for they are tricksy and bring naught but sorrow." But the young man heeded not her words, for the thought of his father burned in his heart. The next morning, he took only a crust of bread and a small flask of water and set out. He knew not whither to go, but walked towards the rising sun, hoping for a sign. He walked for many days and many nights, through dark forests and over tall mountains. At last, his crust of bread was eaten, and his flask was dry.
The young man grew faint with hunger and stumbled, and then fell upon the ground under a large oak tree. As he lay there, he heard a cackle, and there was the imp, sitting on a branch above him. "Well now, young master," chirped the imp, "have you found aught of what was never looked for?" "Alas, I have found nothing but hunger and weariness," said the young man, "and I fear I shall die here." The imp twirled on the branch and said, "To find something, first lose something more. Take off your boots and cast them into the river that flows nearby." "My boots?" asked the young man. "But why should I do such a foolish thing?" "Ask not why, but do as I say," the imp replied, "or stay here and feed the crows with your bones." The young man, having no other hope, sighed and pulled off his worn leather boots. He went to the nearby river and cast them into the rushing water.
No sooner had he done so than the waters of the river parted with a great roar, and a dry path appeared on the riverbed. "Follow that path," screeched the imp from the tree, "and it will lead you where you need to go!" The young man, barefoot as he was, felt a great wonder and stepped onto the path between the divided waters. The riverbed was made of smooth stones, and a strange luminous moss grew upon them, lighting the way. He walked for what seemed like an hour, with the river walls towering on either side. At last, the path ended abruptly at the mouth of a dark cave. The imp was suddenly there again, perched on a stalagmite near the entrance, and it grinned, saying, "Enter if you dare." The young man, though his heart beat fast, nodded and said, "I seek my father; I must enter." He took a deep breath and stepped into the pitch blackness of the cave. The imp chuckled and snapped its fingers, and a small, flickering green flame appeared on its palm, lighting the passage somewhat, and it said, "Don't thank me yet, morsel."
The passage was narrow and low, and the young man had to stoop as he followed the imp's bobbing light. The imp chattered incessantly about the foolishness of mortals and sang rude songs in a high-pitched voice. After a time, the narrow passage opened into a vast cavern. Great crystals grew from the walls and ceiling, and they pulsed with a soft, inner light. In the center of the cavern lay a still, dark pool of water, which lay like a black mirror. "There now, brave searcher," the imp said, pointing a bony finger, "Look into the water, and see what you see." The young man, feeling a strange pull from the dark water, approached the edge of the pool. He knelt and gazed into its still surface, and after a moment, an image slowly began to form in its depths. He saw his father, looking gaunt and pale, chained to a damp wall in a small, dark cell. Then the image rippled and was gone, and the imp beside him said, "Well, that's a bit grim, even for my tastes."
The young man sprang to his feet, his face etched with sorrow and anger, and he cried to the imp, "Where is that place? I must save him!" "Patience, little wood-chip," said the imp, flicking its ears, "All in good time, and not before. But first, you must do a little something for me." "Anything!" the young man replied earnestly. "I will do whatever you ask, only tell me how to reach my father." "Excellent," chirped the imp. "There is a sleeping giant in the next cavern. I desire a single red feather from the ridiculous hat he wears." "Be warned, he snores like thunder and, if he wakes, he tends to eat mortals for breakfast, and not just the crunchy bits." The young man, though fear pricked him, nodded and said, "Show me the way to this giant." The imp cackled with delight and led him through another passage into an even larger cavern. There, a giant vast as a hill lay asleep on the cavern floor, and his snoring rumbled like an earthquake. Upon his great head was a gaudy, patched hat, set slightly askew, with a single crimson feather stuck in its band. "There you are then," whispered the imp, already fading. "Try not to get squashed flat as a dried leaf." And then it was gone.
The young man, left alone in the vast, rumbling cavern, began tiptoeing with utmost care towards the sleeping giant. Each footfall seemed to echo, and once the giant grunted in its sleep and rolled slightly, making the very ground shake. The young man froze like a statue, his heart pounding against his ribs. But soon the giant's snores returned to their regular, deafening rhythm, and the young man breathed again. He crept onward, and at last stood beside the monstrous head, and reached a trembling hand towards the gaudy hat. With a swift movement, he plucked the crimson feather from the hatband. As he did so, a small, tarnished silver locket, which he had not seen before, fell from the hatband and landed softly on the stone. The young man, feeling a strange compulsion, quickly picked it up along with the feather. He fumbled with the clasp, and it sprang open, revealing a tiny painting of his own mother, looking much younger, and beside her, a man who looked startlingly like his father ought to have looked, only it was the giant himself, smiling kindly. The young man stood dumbfounded, the locket and feather slipping from his grasp, just as the imp reappeared with a pop and said, "Well, that's one way to find family resemblances, eh?"
"But... this... how can this be?" stammered the young man, pointing a shaking finger at the locket now on the floor. "Was that my father?" "The very same," the imp replied, cleaning a pointed fingernail on the young man's sleeve. "Or rather, what's left of him under a rather nasty enchantment." "A jealous sorcerer, who also loved your mother from afar, put a curse on him years ago, turning him into this slumbering behemoth." "My mother..." the young man whispered, his voice barely audible. "Did she know of this cruel fate all these years?" "Of course, she knew, the poor dear," the imp said with a sigh that sounded like wind whistling through a crack. "But what could a poor woman do against such dark magic but weep in secret?" "Then I must break this enchantment!" declared the young man. "Tell me, imp, what must be done?" "Ah, now we come to it!" the imp rubbed its hands. "The feather you hold, from his very own hat, must be used to tickle his left nostril until he sneezes precisely seven times." "But be nimble, little flea, for each sneeze will shake this mountain, and his thrashing might crush you by accident before the seventh." The young man squared his shoulders, took the crimson feather, and approached the sleeping face of his giant-father once more. "Oh, this should be vastly amusing to watch," the imp snickered from a high ledge. "One way or another."
With a hand that surprisingly did not shake, the young man reached out and delicately tickled the giant-father's left nostril with the tip of the feather. The giant's nose twitched violently, and then it let out a sneeze like a hurricane, so mighty that the cavern shook and stalactites rained down from the ceiling; one sharp stalactite grazed the young man's arm, drawing blood. Ignoring the stinging pain in his arm, the young man dodged a falling rock and quickly applied the feather again. The second sneeze was louder still, and it split a nearby boulder in two; the third caused a deep fissure to crack open in the cavern floor, spewing noxious fumes. The young man barely leaped back in time to avoid falling into the steaming, sizzling edge of the new chasm. Four, five, six times he tickled, and each sneeze brought fresh calamity – walls groaned, the dark pool boiled over with green slime, and the imp above shouted, "Are we enjoying the show, little master?" His clothes were torn, his face blackened by fumes, and his arm was bleeding freely, but the young man gathered his last strength for the seventh tickle. He thrust the feather into the giant's nostril one last time, and the seventh sneeze was the mightiest of all, accompanied by a blinding flash of light that filled the entire cavern. The young man was thrown backwards, striking his head on a stone, and for a moment, all was confusion as the rumbling faded and the intense light dimmed. When he could see again and painfully shook his aching head, the giant was gone, and in its place stood his own father, looking bewildered but whole and human once more.
Words were not needed between them for a long moment; the father and son simply embraced, and tears flowed freely down both their faces. "My son, my son," the father finally said, his voice rough from disuse, "It is as if I have woken from a long, dark dream. I remember nothing of being... that other." The young man quickly told him of the sorcerer's curse, the imp, and the perilous journey he had undertaken. Just then, the imp popped into existence beside them, looking rather pleased with itself, and said, "Well, that was quite a show! My feather, if you please, little master." The young man, weary but content, gratefully handed the crimson feather back to the imp. "Toodle-oo then!" said the imp, stuffing the feather in its cap. "And as for that other prison you saw in the pool – the sorcerer's little dungeon – well, breaking a giant-curse tends to rattle even minor enchantments loose. He won't be going back there." With a final cackle and a puff of particularly noxious green smoke, the imp was gone for good. The father and son, supporting each other, found their way out of the caverns, and saw that the river now flowed as normal, their cast-off boots likely long gone. They journeyed back to the small cottage, where the old mother wept with joy to see her husband returned and her son safe, and she rejoiced greatly. And so they lived together in peace and contentment for many years, and the jealous sorcerer was never heard from again; some say he burst from sheer spite when he learned the curse was broken.
