The Fisherman's Return
There was once a fisherman who had been away from his wife and his cottage by the shore for many long years. For a great wind had caught his little boat and blown him far across the wide sea to shores he did not know. At last, his boat drifted to an island where there dwelt a great tall man who had but one single eye in the middle of his forehead. This man kept great shaggy sheep, bigger than oxen, and liked no strangers upon his land. Now the fisherman had naught to eat, so he went to the tall man's cave and asked for a little food and perhaps shelter for the night. But the tall man laughed a terrible laugh, and rolled a great stone across the mouth of the cave, and shut the fisherman inside with the sheep. The tall man asked the fisherman his name, and the fisherman, thinking quickly, said, "My name is Clever-One." The tall man poked the fisherman and said, "You are thin now, Clever-One, but I shall eat you on the morrow when you are perhaps fatter." All night, while the tall man snored, the fisherman found a long stake of green wood left from the fire, sharpened the end to a fine point in the embers, and hid it amongst the sheep's woolly coats. When the tall man awoke and stretched, the fisherman took the stake and with all his might thrust the sharp, hot point into the man's single eye, and the man howled terribly.
The tall man stumbled about the cave roaring, "Clever-One has hurt me! Clever-One has blinded me!" Other tall folk on the island heard him and shouted back, "If Clever-One hurts you, then you are indeed clever to be hurt by yourself! Be quiet now!" When morning came, the blinded man rolled back the stone to let his sheep out to pasture, feeling each one's back as it passed; but the fisherman clung tight to the woolly underside of the largest ram. The tall man felt the great ram's back, but not the fisherman underneath, and so the fisherman was carried safely out of the cave. Once free, the fisherman ran to his boat, and as he pushed off from the shore, he shouted back, "It was not Clever-One who blinded you, you fool, but the fisherman whose home is far away!" The tall man roared in fury, and though blind, he tore up great rocks from the shore and hurled them towards the sound of the fisherman's voice. The rocks fell into the sea nearby, making waves like hills that nearly swamped the little boat. The fisherman rowed with all his might and just managed to escape into the open sea once more. He sailed for many days until he came to another island, where a woman who knew enchantments dwelt in a fine house in a clearing. She seemed kind and offered him drink in a cup, stirring it first with a little golden spoon.
The fisherman was weary from the sea and thirsty, so he thanked her and drank it down. No sooner had he drunk the last drop than his hands became trotters and his nose a snout, and he turned into a fat, grunting pig. The woman laughed and struck him lightly with a little wand, saying, "Now go to the sty where the others are!" and drove him out of the house. There in a muddy sty were many other pigs of all sizes, rooting for acorns that fell from a great oak nearby. But one old boar with long tusks sat quietly in a corner and looked quite wise, as if remembering what it was to be a man. The fisherman-pig trotted over to the old boar and tried to speak, but only grunts came out. The old boar seemed to understand, for he nudged the fisherman-pig with his snout and pointed towards a patch of small white flowers growing just outside the sty. The fisherman knew this must be important, so he reached his snout through the fence around the sty and quickly ate one of the flowers. It did not change him back at once, but he felt stronger, knew her wand could not harm him further, and suddenly found he could speak again, though still in a pig's body. Just then, the woman came out of her house with a bucket of slops, ready to admire her fine collection of pigs.
The fisherman-pig stood before her and said in a clear voice, "Wicked woman! Your magic has weakened! Change me back to my true shape!" The woman started back and looked amazed to hear a pig speak so boldly. She saw her wand was indeed useless against him now, so she said, "Perhaps I will change you back, if you promise to stay here willingly and accept rich gifts from me." "I want no gifts," said the fisherman-pig, "I wish only to return to my wife and my cottage by the shore." The woman sighed, and said, "Very well, but only if you take my wand and change all the other pigs back into men first; then I shall restore you." The fisherman-pig agreed readily, took the wand, and tapped each pig in the sty, and one by one they turned back into bewildered men of many lands. The men rubbed their eyes, looked about in confusion, and then heartily thanked the talking pig who had freed them. The woman then kept her word, tapped the fisherman-pig with the wand, and he stood there a man again, blinking in the sunlight. She told him the way he must sail to reach his home shore, but warned him to beware of the singing rocks that charmed sailors to their doom. The fisherman thanked her for her help at the last, and set sail once more in his little boat, together with the men he had freed.
After some days sailing, they heard a sweet singing that seemed to float over the water, and saw it came from tall grey rocks rising from the sea. The freed men sighed and turned the boat towards the rocks, forgetting all about going home, wishing only to hear the music more closely. But the fisherman remembered the woman's warning, and quickly took lumps of hard goat cheese he had saved from the last island, and plugged the ears of his companions tightly. Then he plugged his own ears too, so none of them could hear the sweet, dangerous song. The men looked angry and struggled, not understanding, but the fisherman held the tiller firm and steered them onwards. Thus they sailed safely past the tall grey rocks, though they could see bones scattered at their base. But soon they came to a narrow strait of water, where on one side a great whirlpool churned hungrily, and on the other, sharp black rocks stood like teeth. If they sailed too near the whirlpool the boat would be sucked down, but if they steered too close to the rocks it would be smashed to pieces. The fisherman chose to steer nearer the sharp rocks, thinking it better to risk damage than be swallowed whole by the whirlpool. As they passed, sharp crags like long arms seemed to reach down, and snatched six of the freed men from the boat, but the boat itself passed through safely enough.
Sad at the loss of more companions, the fisherman steered to a green island where many fat cattle were grazing peacefully near the shore. "Touch none of these beasts," warned the fisherman, "for I feel they belong to someone great and powerful who dwells inland." The men agreed, and for many days they caught fish from the sea and found berries on the shore, and waited for a good wind to sail again. But then the wind did not come for a long while, the fish grew scarce, the berries were gone, and the men grew very hungry indeed. One day, while the fisherman had walked inland seeking a spring of water, the hungry men whispered amongst themselves, killed two of the fattest cows, and began to roast the meat. The fisherman came back and saw what they had done, smelling the roasting meat, and cried out, "What is this folly? Have you forgotten my warning?" The men looked down at their feet and mumbled, "We were too hungry to wait any longer, master." But as they spoke, the meat on the roasting spits began to moo sorrowfully, as if the cows were still alive. Then the men were greatly afraid, and wished they had listened to the fisherman. That very night a good wind sprang up at last, and they set sail at once, leaving the green island behind.
But when they were out of sight of land, a terrible storm arose just around their boat, though the sea elsewhere was calm. Lightning struck the mast, great waves washed over the deck, and all the men who had eaten the forbidden meat were drowned in the churning water. The fisherman alone clung to a piece of the broken mast and drifted for nine days upon the empty sea. On the tenth day, he was washed ashore on a lovely island where a beautiful woman with eyes like the deep sea found him and kept him there through kindness and subtle enchantments. She gave him delicious food to eat, and a soft bed to sleep in, and sang sweet songs, so that he almost forgot his wife and his cottage, and the years passed like days. One day, however, an old man wearing winged boots came striding over the waves and spoke privately to the beautiful woman. After the messenger left, the woman looked sad but told the fisherman, "A command has come from one greater than I. You must leave me now, but I will help you build a raft." The fisherman was glad he could finally seek his home again, but also sorry to leave the beautiful woman who had been kind in her way. They worked together for four days building a sturdy raft, and she gave him food and fresh water for his journey. Then the fisherman pushed the raft into the water, waved farewell to the woman on the shore, and sailed away alone once more.
He sailed for some time, until one whose realm was the deep sea itself grew aware of him, and was angry that the man who blinded his son, the tall one-eyed shepherd, still sought to reach home. This angry one sent a great wave that crashed down upon the raft, smashing it to splinters and leaving the fisherman swimming alone in the rough water. Just as he tired, a woman with green hair rose from the waves nearby, riding on a dolphin, and gave him her belt, saying, "Tie this about you, brave fisherman, and you will not drown." The fisherman did as she said, and at once felt lighter in the water and found he could swim easily through the great waves. He swam for two days and two nights, until at last he saw land ahead that looked like the shores near his own village. As he neared the beach, he remembered the sea-woman's belt, untied it, and respectfully cast it back into the waves where it vanished. Then he crawled onto the sand, weary beyond measure, but alive and on shores he knew. He soon saw it was indeed the land near his own village, but he did not go straight to his cottage; instead he found some old rags cast upon the shore and made himself look like a poor beggar. Along the path, he met a young man carrying fishing nets, who was his own son, grown tall in the years he was lost, but the son did not know him in his rags. The fisherman, in his beggar's voice, asked the young man for news of the village, and if the fisherman's wife who dwelt there still waited for her husband.
"My mother still waits," said the young man sadly, "though many village men wish to marry her for the cottage and boat, saying her husband must be long dead." "They sit in her small cottage day after day, eating her food and drinking her ale, and making loud boastful noise." The fisherman thanked the young man for the news, his heart heavy, and went on towards his own cottage by the shore. As he reached the gate, a thin old dog lying in the sun lifted its head, wagged its tail weakly, and whined softly, for it knew its master despite the rags. A tear ran down the fisherman's cheek, hidden by his beard, as he silently acknowledged the faithful beast, which then laid its head down upon its paws and breathed its last. He went into the cottage and saw the greedy suitors feasting at his own table, while his wife sat sadly by the hearth, spinning thread. The suitors laughed at the poor beggar, mocked his rags, and threw hard crusts of bread at him. But the wife rose quietly, despite the suitors' jests, and brought the beggar a bowl of stew and a piece of bread. As she gave it, he looked into her eyes and said in his low beggar's voice, "Good woman, be patient still; perhaps good news comes soon upon the tide." She looked closely at the beggar then, and a strange light flickered in her own eyes for a moment before she turned away sighing.
That evening, the wife rose and spoke to the suitors, saying, "Tomorrow, I will marry the man amongst you who can mend the fisherman's great net where it lies broken in the shed, for only my husband had the skill." The suitors all cheered and boasted loudly that such a simple task was beneath them, but they would do it easily for her hand. The next day, each suitor tried in turn to mend the great, complex net, but they only fumbled with the knots, tangled the lines, and made the tears worse than before. When all had failed, the beggar stepped forward amongst the laughter and jeers, and asked the wife if he might try his hand. The wife nodded silently, ignoring the suitors' scorn. The beggar took the net, and his fingers flew over the lines with a surety and speed that silenced all mockery; knots untangled, tears vanished, and the net lay whole in moments. The wife cried out, tears now of joy, "It is you! My husband! Only you could mend the great net so!" The fisherman cast off his rags, revealing himself strong and hale despite his journeys, and shouting "I am returned!", he took up a stout club from the hearth and drove the astonished suitors tumbling from his cottage. Then the fisherman, his wife, and his son embraced in the middle of the floor, the long waiting over at last. And so the fisherman, his wife, and his son lived together peacefully in their cottage by the shore, and the fisherman fished the sea he knew so well for all the rest of his days.
